169412_1 (#3144)
dotnet/csharplang: spec/interfaces.md

### Variant type parameter lists

#### General

Variant type parameter lists can only occur on interface and delegate types. The difference from ordinary *type-parameter-list*s is the optional *variance-annotation* on each type parameter.

(#Grammar_variant_type_parameter_list)
```ANTLR
variant-type-parameter-list:
    <variant-type-parameters>
```

(#Grammar_variant_type_parameters)
```ANTLR
variant-type-parameters:
    attributes~opt~ variance-annotation~opt~ type-parameter
    variant-type-parameters *,* attributes~opt~ variance-annotation~opt~ type-parameter
```

(#Grammar_variance_annotation)
```ANTLR
variance-annotation:
    in
    out
```

If the variance annotation is out, the type parameter is said to be ***covariant***. If the variance annotation is in, the type parameter is said to be ***contravariant***. If there is no variance annotation, the type parameter is said to be ***invariant***.

[*Example*: In the following:

```csharp
interface C<out X, in Y, Z>
{
    X M(Y y);
    Z P { get; set; }
}
```

> X is covariant, Y is contravariant and Z is invariant. *end example*]

Reviewer: The X, Y and Z should be code-fenced:

```suggestion
`X` is covariant, `Y` is contravariant and `Z` is invariant. *end example*]
```

The occurrence of variance annotations in the type parameter list of a type restricts the places where types can occur within the type declaration.

A type T is ***output-unsafe*** if one of the following holds:
- `T` is a contravariant type parameter
- `T` is an array type with an output-unsafe element type

> - `T` is an interface or delegate type S<A<sub>1</sub>,… A<sub>K</sub> constructed from a generic type S<X<sub>1</sub>, … X<sub>K</sub>> where for at least one A<sub>i</sub> one of the following holds:

Reviewer: This is a special case where markdown doesn't preserve the fidelity in the original word source. We've discussed, and we prefer keeping the code formatting instead of the subscript:

```suggestion
- `T` is an interface or delegate type `Si,… Ak` constructed from a generic type `S<Xi, … Xk>` where for at least one `Ai` one of the following holds:
```

>     - X<sub>i</sub> is covariant or invariant and A<sub>i</sub> is output-unsafe.

Reviewer: similar:

```suggestion
    - `Xi` is covariant or invariant and `Ai` is output-unsafe.
```

>     - X<sub>i</sub> is contravariant or invariant and A<sub>i</sub> is input-unsafe.

Reviewer: same:

```suggestion
    - `Xi` is contravariant or invariant and `Ai` is input-unsafe.
```

A type T is ***input-unsafe*** if one of the following holds:
- `T` is a covariant type parameter
- `T` is an array type with an input-unsafe element type

> - `T` is an interface or delegate type  S<A<sub>1</sub>,… A<sub>K</sub> constructed from a generic type S<X<sub>1</sub>, … X<sub>K</sub>> where for at least one A<sub>i</sub> one of the following holds:

Reviewer: Same comment as above:

```suggestion
- `T` is an interface or delegate type  `S<Ai,… Ak>` constructed from a generic type `S<Xi, … Xk>` where for at least one `Ai` one of the following holds:
```

>     - X<sub>i</sub> is covariant or invariant and A<sub>i</sub> is input-unsafe.

Reviewer: again:

```suggestion
    - `Xi` is covariant or invariant and `Ai` is input-unsafe.
```

>     - X<sub>i</sub> is contravariant or invariant and A<sub>i</sub> is output-unsafe.

Reviewer: same:

```suggestion
    - `Xi` is contravariant or invariant and `Ai` is output-unsafe.
```

Intuitively, an output-unsafe type is prohibited in an output position, and an input-unsafe type is prohibited in an input position.

A type is ***output-safe*** if it is not output-unsafe, and ***input-safe*** if it is not input-unsafe.

#### Variance conversion

The purpose of variance annotations is to provide for more lenient (but still type safe) conversions to interface and delegate types. To this end the definitions of implicit (§11.2) and explicit conversions (§11.3) make use of the notion of variance-convertibility, which is defined as follows:

A type T<A<sub>i</sub>, …, A<sub>n</sub>> is variance-convertible to a type T<B<sub>i</sub> …, B<sub>n</sub>> if T is either an interface or a delegate type declared with the variant type parameters T<X<sub>i</sub>, …, X<sub>n</sub>>, and for each variant type parameter X<sub>i</sub> one of the following holds:

- X<sub>i</sub> is covariant and an implicit reference or identity conversion exists from A<sub>i</sub> to B<sub>i</sub>
- X<sub>i</sub> is contravariant and an implicit reference or identity conversion exists from B<sub>i</sub> to A<sub>i</sub>

> - X<sub>i</sub> is invariant and an identity conversion exists from A<sub>i</sub> to B<sub>i</sub>

Reviewer: Same set of changes as above.

```csharp
interface IControl
{
    void Paint();
}
interface ITextBox: IControl
{
    void SetText(string text);
}
interface IListBox: IControl
{
    void SetItems(string[] items);
}
interface IComboBox: ITextBox, IListBox {}
```

the base interfaces of `IComboBox` are `IControl`, `ITextBox`, and `IListBox`. In other words, the `IComboBox` interface above inherits members `SetText` and `SetItems` as well as `Paint`. *end example*]

Members inherited from a constructed generic type are inherited after type substitution. That is, any constituent types in the member have the base class declaration’s type parameters replaced with the corresponding type arguments used in the *class-base* specification. [*Example*: In the following code

```csharp
interface IBase<T>
{
    T[] Combine(T a, T b);
}
interface IDerived : IBase<string[,]>
{
    // Inherited: string[][,] Combine(string[,] a, string[,] b);
}
```

> the interface IDerived inherits the Combine method after the type parameter T is replaced with string[,]. *end example*]

Reviewer: The types should be code fenced:

```suggestion
the interface `IDerived` inherits the `Combine` method after the type parameter `T` is replaced with `string[,]`. *end example*]
```

Each formal parameter type of an interface method shall be input-safe (§18.2.3.2), and the return type shall be either void or output-safe. In addition, any out or ref formal parameter types shall also be output-safe. 
> [!NOTE] Even out parameters are required to be input-safe, due to common implementation restrictions. 

Furthermore, each class type constraint, interface type constraint and type parameter constraint on any type parameter of the method shall be input-safe.

These rules ensure that any covariant or contravariant usage of the interface remains typesafe. [*Example*:

```csharp
interface I<out T> { void M<U>() where U : T; }
```

is ill-formed because the usage of T as a type parameter constraint on U is not input-safe.

Were this restriction not in place it would be possible to violate type safety in the following manner:

```csharp
class B {}
class D : B {}
class E : B {}
class C : I<D> { public void M<U>() {…} }
…
I<B> b = new C();
b.M<E>();
```

> This is actually a call to C.M<E>. But that call requires that E derive from D, so type safety would be violated here. *end example*]

Reviewer: missing a few code-fences:

```suggestion
This is actually a call to `C.M<E>`. But that call requires that `E` derive from `D`, so type safety would be violated here. *end example*]
```

```csharp
class Shape: ICloneable
{
    object ICloneable.Clone() {…}
    int IComparable.CompareTo(object other) {…} // invalid
}
```

the declaration of `IComparable.CompareTo` results in a compile-time error because `IComparable` is not listed in the base class list of Shape and is not a base interface of `ICloneable`. Likewise, in the declarations

```csharp
class Shape: ICloneable
{
    object ICloneable.Clone() {…}
}
class Ellipse: Shape
{
    object ICloneable.Clone() {…} // invalid
}
```

the declaration of `ICloneable.Clone` in Ellipse results in a compile-time error because `ICloneable` is not explicitly listed in the base class list of `Ellipse`. *end example*]

The qualified interface member name of an explicit interface member implementation shall reference the interface in which the member was declared. [*Example*: Thus, in the declarations

```csharp
interface IControl
{
    void Paint();
}
interface ITextBox: IControl
{
    void SetText(string text);
}
class TextBox: ITextBox
{
    void IControl.Paint() {…}
    void ITextBox.SetText(string text) {…}
}
```

> the explicit interface member implementation of Paint must be written as `IControl.Paint`, not ITextBox.Paint. *end example*]

Reviewer: ITextBox.Paint should also be code-fenced:

```suggestion
the explicit interface member implementation of Paint must be written as `IControl.Paint`, not `ITextBox.Paint`. *end example*]
```

### Uniqueness of implemented interfaces

The interfaces implemented by a generic type declaration shall remain unique for all possible constructed types. Without this rule, it would be impossible to determine the correct method to call for certain constructed types. [*Example*: Suppose a generic class declaration were permitted to be written as follows:

```csharp
interface I<T>
{

> void F();

Reviewer: This line should be indented:

```suggestion
    void F();
```

}
class X<U,V>: I<U>, I<V> // Error: I<U> and I<V> conflict
{
    void I<U>.F() {…}
    void I<V>.F() {…}
}
```

Were this permitted, it would be impossible to determine which code to execute in the following case:

```csharp
I<int> x = new X<int,int>();
x.F();
```

*end example*]

To determine if the interface list of a generic type declaration is valid, the following steps are performed:

> - Let L be the list of interfaces directly specified in a generic class, struct, or interface declaration C.

Reviewer: There are a number of items that should be code fenced here:

```suggestion
- Let `L` be the list of interfaces directly specified in a generic class, struct, or interface declaration `C`.
```

> - Add to L any base interfaces of the interfaces already in L.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Add to `L` any base interfaces of the interfaces already in `L`.
```

> - Remove any duplicates from L.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove any duplicates from `L`.
```

> - If any possible constructed type created from C would, after type arguments are substituted into L, cause two interfaces in L to be identical, then the declaration of C is invalid. Constraint declarations are not considered when determining all possible constructed types.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If any possible constructed type created from `C` would, after type arguments are substituted into `L`, cause two interfaces in `L` to be identical, then the declaration of `C` is invalid. Constraint declarations are not considered when determining all possible constructed types.
```

> > [!NOTE] In the class declaration X above, the interface list L consists of l&lt;U&gt; and I&lt;V&gt;. The declaration is invalid because any constructed type with U and V being the same type would cause these two interfaces to be identical types.

Reviewer: The generics should be code-fenced instead of HTML encoded:

```suggestion
> [!NOTE] In the class declaration `X` above, the interface list `L` consists of `l<U>` and `I<V>`. The declaration is invalid because any constructed type with `U` and `V` being the same type would cause these two interfaces to be identical types.
```

It is possible for interfaces specified at different inheritance levels to unify:

```csharp
interface I<T>
{
    void F();
}
class Base<U>: I<U>
{
    void I<U>.F() {…}
}
class Derived<U,V>: Base<U>, I<V> // Ok
{
    void I<V>.F() {…}
}
```

This code is valid even though `Derived<U,V>` implements both `I<U>` and `I<V>`. The code

```csharp
I<int> x = new Derived<int,int>();
x.F();
```

> invokes the method in Derived, since `Derived<int,int>'`effectively re-implements `I<int>` (§18.6.7).

Reviewer: missing space:

```suggestion
invokes the method in Derived, since `Derived<int,int>'` effectively re-implements `I<int>` (§18.6.7).
```

Notable implications of the interface-mapping algorithm are:
- Explicit interface member implementations take precedence over other members in the same class or struct when determining the class or struct member that implements an interface member.
- Neither non-public nor static members participate in interface mapping.

[*Example*: In the following code

```csharp
interface ICloneable
{
    object Clone();
}
class C: ICloneable
{
 object ICloneable.Clone() {…}
 public object Clone() {…}
}
```

the `ICloneable.Clone` member of `C` becomes the implementation of `Clone` in 'ICloneable' because explicit interface member implementations take precedence over other members. *end example*]

If a class or struct implements two or more interfaces containing a member with the same name, type, and parameter types, it is possible to map each of those interface members onto a single class or struct member. [*Example*:

```csharp
interface IControl
{
    void Paint();
}
interface IForm
{
    void Paint();
}
class Page: IControl, IForm
{
    public void Paint() {…}
}
```

> Here, the `Paint` methods of both `IControl` and `IForm` are mapped onto the `Paint` method in Page. It is of course also possible to have separate explicit interface member implementations for the two methods. *end example*]

Reviewer: One additional code fence:

```suggestion
Here, the `Paint` methods of both `IControl` and `IForm` are mapped onto the `Paint` method in `Page`. It is of course also possible to have separate explicit interface member implementations for the two methods. *end example*]
```
